All right, Cory asks a really good
question, it's a philosophical question.
Why do you think that statecharts and
state machines are not more commonly used?
So what weaknesses might a statechart
have related to modeling complexity?
In fact, I have a slide for this, and
it's the complexity trade-offs between
state machines and statecharts.
So with the state machine,
which by definition is simpler than
the statechart, the complexity of state
machines is really small because you're
only dealing with a finite set of states.
But as soon as you have multiple states,
you have exponentially more transitions.
And it becomes a lot more
complex than statecharts, or
even your normal bottom-up programming.
With statecharts, the learning curve
is a lot steeper at first, and
it might seem like overkill.
But once your app gets to
a level of complexity,
you're going to see that statecharts
compose really well in order to
mitigate the effects of combinatorial
explosion of states or added complexity.
And with bottom-up, since every
single place you write a feature or
you write something in an event handler,
you have to check everywhere else
in the code that might touch that.
It's just a linear growing complexity
because the more you add, the more
edge cases you have to deal with, and the
more defensive programming you have to do.
So statecharts are not more commonly used,
I'm really hoping that they will be.
And that's one of
the goals of this workshop,
is to educate you about statecharts and
how you could use them to your benefit.
But statecharts are not
commonly used right now
because it is a big learning curve.
I like to say that there's two types
of state management libraries,
especially in the front end.
There's the change state whenever
you want driven libraries.
And there's the event-driven libraries.
So the frustration with event-driven
libraries, such as Redux and
xstate and MobX-state-tree and
other libraries like that,
is that event-driven libraries don't
allow you to mutate the state directly.
So it's not as easy,
there's a level of indirection there.
And you could consider xstate
to be Redux but more rigid,
because now you have these rules of
what you could do in certain states.
And so because of that, a lot of frontend
engineers feel like it's easier to just
mutate state and to put logic in event
handlers, and at start, this works.
But if you've ever inherited an app
where you do have logic which is spread
out in all these event handlers,
it becomes really, really hard for
any other engineer on your team to really
understand all the logic that's going on.
Because there's no central
place where that logic lives.
There's no convenient
reducer like Redux has.
You have to just piece it all together and
form a mental map of it.
It's not really the the ideal scenario.
Also, statecharts have always been
an uphill battle even with David Herro.
He wrote something in a newspaper about 25
or 20 years ago, talking about how selling
statecharts is still a pretty hard sell
because it is a different way of thinking.
We're no longer thinking in,
okay, let's update the state,
let's just mutate it directly.
Now we're thinking in terms of events,
and in terms of how different states
can react differently to events.
But we see that there's so
many benefits to using statecharts.
And a lot of those benefits are based
around the fact that, like we talked about
in the beginning, these statecharts
are essentially directed graphs.
So you could traverse
those directed graphs.
You could do things such
as model-based testing.
You could have analytics
where you could predict and
track just all the different ways your
users could use your application.
You could transport
statecharts between languages.
In fact, statecharts are so
useful that they are part of UML,
like we talked about earlier.
And so having that adopted by UML means
they're used in many different things,
such as embedded electronics,
automotive engineering, aeronautics,
and in fact, many, many other things.
And so the concepts that you learn in this
workshop are going to be applicable to
pretty much anything related
to statecharts at all.
If you search statecharts with any
other language, such as C++ or Java or
Python, you're going to see that there
are a lot of related state machine and
statechart libraries out there.
All the concepts that you've learned here
are directly applicable to pretty much
anything that has to do with
statecharts and state machines.
Additionally, there's a spec called SCXML,
it was finalized in 2015,
it's a W3C recommendation.
And If you have the time to look
through this ginormous spec,
it is a spec for statechart, state
machine notation for control abstraction.
And essentially, just like it says, it's
a way of abstracting state machines and
statecharts in, well, XML, which I was
gonna say is not really favorable anymore.
But with JSX,
it is pretty favorable now, I guess.
And this is a way of defining
your machines in an abstract way that
could be transported between languages.
And so that's one of my goals with xstate,
is to enable you to
define these machines and
statecharts in a way that could be used
in any framework or no framework at all.
And in fact, if you look at SCXML,
you're going to see a lot of these
things mapped directly to xstate.
And that's the secret of xstate,
is that xstate is based pretty much
completely on this SCXML spec.
xstate doesn't invent anything,
it doesn't introduce anything new.
In fact, it even uses the same
algorithms that SCXML uses.
And so if you're really interested, you
could dive in here into the pseudocode,
and see how exactly these algorithms work.
And so you could see that xstate
is complex because there's a lot
to learn here, but
it is also standardized.
It's based on a spec, and it's also
compatible with other languages too.
So Johan says xstate
visualization will help for
the library to become used more and
more, and that's very true.
I am working on newer visualizers for
xstate,
both for dev tools,
ones that you can embed anywhere.
And also an update to xstate-viz,
which is the visualizer used on
xstate.js.org/viz.
So this is using an older version
of xstate, and pretty soon,
this is going to have an upgraded version.
All right, so with all of that said,
there's three great resources for you.
In fact, there's a lot of resources,
but the three that I always point to
are the world of statecharts,
which is statecharts.github.io.
The Spectrum community, where you
could join and talk about statecharts,
at spectrum.chat/statecharts.
And also the xstate documentation,
which that link is broken.
The xstate documentation, which has a lot
of really useful resources for you too.
So if you go to About > Tutorials,
you will see a long list of tutorials, and
more are going to be added pretty soon.
There's lots of videos and tutorials and
different ways that
people are using xstate.
xstate is useful both in the front end and
the back end too.
And in fact, xstate is useful for,
if you just want to model something,
even if you're not intending on using it
in JavaScript, or using it in your apps.
You could just play around and verify that
your model of how some logic is supposed
to work is actually
the way it should work.
Kevin asked about xstate 5.0.
So with xstate 5,
which is coming in a couple months,
we're still working pretty hard on it.
xstate 5 is going to introduce a major,
major simplification.
First of all, it's going to take
the approach that everything is an actor.
So the core API of xstate is
not going to change by much.
Everything is still going to
feel pretty much the same.
But it's going to be treating actors
in a much more simplified way.
Working with actors in xstate is
definitely a big learning curve.
And with xstate version 5 it's going to
be closer to the pure actor model and
strongly influenced by Akka, which is a
very popular actor model in Java or Scala.
So there's also going to be
a size reduction because xstate
version 5 is going to be modular.
If you just need the machine and
you don't need the interpreter,
you could import just the machine.
If you need certain features but
wanna leave certain features out,
you only need to import
exactly what you need.
So xstate version 5 is also gonna come
with a lot of compatibility between
other tools, such as PlantUML and
full SC XML support.
So that you could translate xstate
machines to SC XML, and even use those
SC XML definitions in any other language
or library that supports SC XML..
And you'd be surprised, there's quite
a few libraries that support SC XML.
There's many other really interesting
topics related to statecharts and
xstate that are worth exploring.
Such as automated tests with
model-based testing, as well as
analysis automatically generating
analytics from state transitions.
And also being able to predict
which states can be traveled to,
depending on your user.
Also, visualization is a huge topic.
There's the xstate visualizer, but
xstate is also compatible with
many other visualizers out there.
And yeah, there's also a lot of tools and
a lot of different ways that you can
integrate xstate into your applications.
So I highly encourage
you to check them out.
And if you are interested
in more of these topics,
please let me know or let Frontend Masters
know, and we will talk about it.
That is the end of my workshop.
I hope that you learned a lot
about state machines, statecharts,
a little bit of computer science,
and xstate.
And so I'm really glad that
you all were able to attend.
And I will be available anywhere on
the Internet at DavidKPiano if you want to
ask me any sort of question, or
just talk about any sort of topic with me.
I hope you enjoyed it, thank you.